>> This is "Marketplace."
The ultimate egg crackdown.
>> When we're buying ethical
eggs, are we getting what we're
paying for?
>> So many choices.
What makes a better egg?
>> So it depends how they were
raised and how they were
hatched.
>> Caged or cage-free.
>> If a chicken's not happy, it
won't lay an egg.
>> I honestly don't care much
about the treatment of
chickens.
>> What's more nutritious,
what's best for the chicken and
what tastes best?
>> It makes me think of
sunshine.
>> This is your "Marketplace."
(♪♪)
We're about to get cracking.
>> Welcome.
>> Thank you so much.
>> Putting one of your
favourite foods to the test.
>> What do you like about eggs?
>> They have good protein.
[ Laughing ]
>> They go well with bacon.
>> Asha: Cooking up a storm?
Chef John Lee.
He's a restaurant owner and
George Brown College
instructor.
>> I try and balance I think
what my palate wants to taste,
and there we have it, versus
what my mind wants to taste.
>> Asha: Do you like it fluffy
or do you like it more soggy?
>> Any way John's cooking it.
[ Laughing ]
>> That's the right answer.
>> Asha: Our testers have no
labels to read, though you will
soon.
No idea of what brand they're
tasting.
>> This looks lighter.
>> So it depends how they
were raised and how they
were hatched.
>> Asha: On the menu today,
conventional, free-run, organic
free range and pastured.
>> Depending on budget.
Do we want to spend that much
money on organic this
or cruelty-free that, how far
does your morality extend
towards your economic reality?
>> Asha: Good question.
What guides our choices when
buying our eggs?
>> Cost, price, definitely.
It's first thing that I really
consider when I'm buying eggs.
>> Asha: Cost is key for mom
Cindy.
>> Why is that important to
you?
>> Because there are a lot of
things that you can't cut costs
on like kids' after-school
activities and that type of
thing but food and groceries
are one thing that I think that
you can.
>> Asha: And that's why Cindy
buys conventional, the cheapest
and most popular from caged
birds.
>> Always start at the end.
Shall we try some?
What do you think?
All right.
Asha, you're a wonderful help.
Thank you.
>> Asha: First up, the top
sellers.
Burnbrae and Gray Ridge.
>> I grew up on an egg farm and
the consistency of the eggs,
it's always different, for
every farm.
>> Asha: Who knew.
Burnbrae's not off to a good
start.
>> It's very bland.
Very bland.
Yes.
>> Asha: How about Gray Ridge?
>> Gorgeous, brilliant colour.
It makes me think of sunshine.
>> Asha: Sunshine?
Sounds idyllic.
But --
>> With the cheapest ones, my
worry is that they're being
raised in a way that's
most cost effective and
probably caring least about the
well-being and the health of
the animals.
>> Asha: You've probably heard
about concerns like
Catherine's.
In campaigns like this.
Animal rights activists have
been battling against
conventional battery cages for
years.
They say cage-free is the only
way to go.
And encourage us to make
guilt-free choices.
>> Buy me.
>> Asha: When we're in the
grocery store.
>> Buy me.
>> I'm certified organic.
>> Who cares.
I'm a buck cheaper.
>> Asha: But are conventional
cages all that bad?
(♪♪)
I'm heading to
southwestern Ontario to a
source of conventional eggs.
>> We're going to disinfect the
bottom of your boots before we
go in.
>> Asha: Dan Veldman has been
an egg farmer for almost 20
years.
>> Asha: Now the suit.
>> There you go.
>> Asha: A surprise guest, the
general manager from Egg
Farmers of Ontario.
>> That's not too bad.
>> Asha: I'm suited up to
protect the birds from disease
like avian flu.
>> How's this for a fashion
statement?
>> Asha: Tagging along, too,
the Association's P.R. guy.
>> We're going to head over to
barn two.
>> Asha: Each conventional or
battery cage barn has 20,000
birds.
>> Wow, that's a huge
operation.
>> Well, it is.
It's a family farm.
>> Asha: Family farm?
Some might call it a factory
farm.
>> This system is about keeping
eggs separated but yet still
having speed so you can get the
collection done.
>> Asha: His collection goes to
Gray Ridge, one of Canada's
biggest sellers.
So how many birds in a cage?
>> These have six.
And you can notice as we, with
the light of the camera, they
get a little bit restless.
>> Asha: And when it comes to
cages like these, there's
trouble at the henhouse.
(♪♪)
The European Union banned
battery cages in 1999.
Scientists have seen abnormal
behaviour in birds.
Farmers had 12 years to get rid
of them.
Other countries have followed
suit.
But Canada?
(♪♪)
Battery cages like
Dan's could be around for
another 20 years.
And Dan says that's okay.
>> The activists tell us that
you know, they're going to live
in deplorable filth for
20 years.
They're not.
They're well cared for.
There's a farmer on the farm.
>> Asha: Still, it's cramped
quarters.
Look at how the hen's head
touches the manure belt.
But to Dan --
>> It's economical.
As you can notice, the hens are
well feathered.
It keeps a very clean egg.
>> Asha: Their whole life is
spent caged.
>> They're singing and they're
eating.
That means a lot to what's
going on in your barn, to the
environment, to the hen health.
(♪♪)
>> Asha: But it's the kind of
life that taster Catherine
questions.
>> When you go to the grocery
store, do you seek that out?
>> Yes, I look for something
that looks like it's not
factory farmed.
Buying free-run organic eggs,
it's really expensive so I
don't want to make light of
that, but battery caged hens
have horrible lives.
>> Asha: Lorraine Johnson's
written "City Farmer", and
argues the case for backyard
chickens.
They can be a great source of
eggs.
(♪♪)
To Lorraine, every hen
in a backyard is one less in a
factory.
I first met her late last
summer.
>> Hi, Lorraine.
>> Hi.
>> Asha: Ever thought of
raising your own backyard hens?
For amateurs like me --
>> Oh!
Oh jeez I scared them.
>> Asha: -- it's not easy.
>> I have done my fair share of
chicken chasing.
Try not to get them really
freaked out or stressed.
>> Do you have any tricks?
>> Getting them comfortable and
familiar with you and the way
to do that is like with any
animal through food.
>> Asha: It's as if she's a
chicken whisperer.
>> This is home, she knows it's
a safe place.
>> Asha: They're curious
creatures.
>> Keep their lives as
interesting as possible.
>> Asha: Lorraine says birds
can have a better life when
they're not confined to a space
the size of this square.
Outdoors, they do what comes
naturally.
Peck, sunbathe, scratch, and
stretch.
>> If the animal hasn't been
treated well, you're eating
that inside that's in the
animal.
>> I don't think the chickens
are unhappy in a cage at all.
>> Why do you say that?
>> Because if you go in a barn,
and you see them there,
the birds are happy.
That's it.
>> How do you know that?
>> If a chicken's not happy, it
won't lay an egg.
That's it.
>> There are all kinds of ways
that they can breed hens to be
basically industrial products.
It doesn't necessarily mean
they're happy.
It means they're basically a
machine.
>> I honestly don't care much
about the treatment of
chickens, I'm probably the only
person here who's going to say
that.
>> That was a debate.
Whoa, just all of a sudden
everything got --
>> Good job selecting people.
[ Laughing ]
(♪♪)
>> Asha: A more ethical egg?
>> This is the future.
>> Asha: And we get cracking
with cage-free.
>> They're getting their
money's worth.
>> Asha: Do you taste the
difference?
>> Asha: "Marketplace," laying
out your options one egg at a
time.
>> Yeah that's right.
You hear the sound cracking.
Yeah, yeah.
>> Asha: We're getting
cracking.
Taste testing scrambled eggs.
When it comes to our conscience
and our wallets, what's best
for the cluckers?
What's best for you?
Do you taste the difference?
>> Oh, yeah, immediately.
>> Asha: They don't know it yet
but our tasters are trying eggs
from hens on grass.
>> It was much stronger than I
noticed with the other eggs
were.
The smell.
>> The aroma.
>> The aroma, yeah.
>> Asha: This carton costs
almost twice as much as caged.
Any clue what type of egg this
might be?
>> Terrible.
>> Asha: Will our ethical
eggspert guess right?
>> I guess conventional myself.
>> Asha: Yikes.
Remember, this test is blind
but even with labels, dietician
Christy Brissette says it's a
guessing game.
>> There's so many different
terms out there, are they
natural, are they free range,
free run, does it have to be
organic and paying more, are
you actually getting what
you're paying for?
>> Yeah, that's always the
question.
>> A huge question.
(♪♪)
>> Asha: "Marketplace" viewer
Catherine Heard is trying to
answer that question.
>> I've been trying to make a
balance between buying eggs
that are affordable but also
buying ones that are ethical.
Nestlaid from hens raised in
enriched colony housing.
>> Asha: Nestlaid, enriched?
This brand costs about 50 cents
more than conventional.
Is it worth the extra coin?
Catherine wants to see
firsthand.
>> Do you have any farms where
I could visit to see how
they're raised?
>> No.
>> No, so there's no way I
could tour a farm?
>> No.
>> Asha: She's told to go
online for a virtual tour.
>> So this is the enriched
colony that is designed to give
birds more space to move
around.
>> Asha: Sounds better than
conventional battery cages.
>> They're pretty close
together.
>> Asha: Catherine can't get
in.
But we can.
>> We're transitioning over to
barn three.
>> Asha: I'm back with Dan
Veldman.
>> We control their lighting,
and uh...
>> Control their lighting.
>> Asha: Mood lighting.
>> Yeah, mood lighting.
>> Asha: One of his barns has
enriched housing.
>> This was one of the first
barns in Ontario to have
enriched housing.
>> Asha: Okay.
Seems like it's just a bigger
cage.
>> Put the camera here, you know
the birds are a little bit
nervous.
>> Asha: So how's is it
different from conventional?
>> These colonies here, there
will be about 30, and we get
double the square inches.
>> Asha: More room and far less
birds than his conventional
barn.
It looks like they're in line
waiting -- scratching.
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
>> Asha: Each colony has a
scratch pad.
And perches.
>> Science has told us the birds
want to be in private, they
want to be in a little dark box
to lay their eggs.
>> Asha: Hey, no peeking.
>> They're getting all ruffled
up.
>> Yeah, they are.
>> Hey babes.
>> Asha: If I was going into a
grocery store, how would I know
that my eggs are coming from
enriched?
>> Yeah, so it will either say
enriched colony, enriched
coop, nestlaid.
The sales on them isn't high
yet.
It will come.
(♪♪)
>> Here we go.
>> Asha: We have a huge
appetite for eggs.
Spending about 2 billion on
them a year.
>> Can we have something that's
commercially viable but also
ethically acceptable and that's
kind of the middle ground that
people are looking for now in
terms of large-scale
production.
>> Asha: The egg industry's
answer to that?
Enriched cages like Dan's.
And whether you think they're a
reasonable compromise, they're
the future.
>> This system to me is going
to be you know, what I'd like to
call maybe the gold standard.
>> Asha: A gold standard
supported by the egg farmers of
Canada.
>> The balance, you know,
between the animal welfare, you
know, workers' safety.
>> Asha: Most farmers have
battery cages.
They'll have until 2036 to
get rid of them.
>> You don't do this overnight.
It has to be a transition that
we can perfect and that we can
make -- we don't want to make
mistakes.
>> Asha: But why not go
cage-free?
In Canada, some of the largest
fast food chains say they're
making the switch in the next
ten years.
>> There is a greater demand.
Restaurants like McDonald's and
Tim Hortons committing to
cage-free.
>> I'm going to wait and see
how that plays out yet.
I mean, when the consumers go
to a grocery store, 90% of them
buy a conventional egg.
I want to produce what the
consumer wants.
>> Asha: But caged eggs aren't
what Catherine wants.
Back on her virtual tour, she's
trying to get to the bottom of
free run.
No cages here.
The hens live in a barn.
>> They still look really
mechanized and the barns are
huge.
>> Asha: How about free range,
it's barn life as well but hens
have access to the outdoors.
In theory.
>> It was a huge outdoor run
but there were almost no
chickens it.
>> Asha: It's up for
interpretation from
farm-to-farm.
Take this one.
The site claims birds prefer
the comfort of their barn.
(♪♪)
Say what?
Birds don't want to go outside?
>> Ready?
>> Yes, sure, let's do it.
>> Asha: This means free range
at Marte Pronk's farm.
He's part of a farmer-owned
cooperative, Organic Meadows.
Their label claim eggs from
hens on pasture.
It's Old McDonald style here
and the only cage these hens
have is a fence.
>> They're pecking at something
new.
[ laughing ]
They're curious.
>> Yes.
>> Asha: They are just loving my
boots.
Until it's cold, his hens get
to roam.
>> Fresh air, sunshine, that
does a lot of good to an
animal.
It's December.
So grass isn't growing and
that's why it looks rough like
this, but look, they're still
happy to pick and scratch.
>> Asha: Marte admits his type
of farming takes more work.
>> Sometimes you will see one
hen that is being chased.
>> Asha: Birds also peck.
Sometimes Marte's got to play
referee.
Organic feed is more expensive.
So this is it.
And hand gathering eggs takes
effort.
>> So this is the nesting box
where the hens lay their eggs.
>> Asha: The cost?
A pricier egg.
Over $4 more than caged.
>> Not everyone can afford your
eggs.
>> I know.
But I think the consumer can
feel confident that what
they're buying, they're getting
their money's worth.
I honestly do.
>> All right.
>> This is our final sample.
>> Let's keep going.
>> Do it, come on.
>> Asha: Our tasters are
getting Organic Meadows a
whirl.
>> Don't forget about me.
>> Asha: I would never.
Never.
It's gorgeous, it's really
nice.
>> If anyone doesn't want this,
it's okay.
[ Laughing ]
>> That is really delicious.
It has like a --
>> I'm actually really
enjoying this.
>> Really delicious all right.
>> Oh!
>> Oh sorry.
>> My guess would be organic.
But I also know it can depend
on what the hens are eating.
>> Asha: She's right.
A hen's diet can affect taste.
How about nutrition?
We sent our samples for lab
testing.
And there's a difference.
A big one.
So who's at the top of the
pecking order?
Organic Meadows.
When it comes to hens on
pasture, other studies show
similar results.
Are you ready to hear the
results?
>> Sure.
Yeah.
Go ahead.
>> Asha: Okay.
Well, nutritionally speaking,
Organic Meadow did the best.
>> Really?
That's good.
And I don't want to seem
surprised, but I'm pleasantly
surprised.
We must be doing something
right.
>> Asha: The areas it did well
in, Vitamin "E", it had three to
five times more than other eggs.
There were twice as much Omega
3s.
Vitamin "A" as well.
And Vitamin "D" was much
higher.
>> Yeah, no, that's nice to
hear, so anyway.
I'm passionate a little bit.
>> Asha: Marte says it's a
testament to his approach.
>> It's good that people
appreciate that.
(♪♪)
>> Asha: Find out how your
favourite brand stacks up.
>> Time to crack open the
truth.
>> Totally shocked and
humiliated.
>> That was my favourite.
>> Asha: What do you want for
breakfast?
Tell us which eggs you want on
your plate at
cbc.ca/marketplace.
>> Asha: "Marketplace," giving
your breakfast an egg up.
>> Here you go.
>> Wow.
[ Laughing ]
>> I want more for me.
>> I can tell, all right.
>> Asha: Six samples of eggs
from different farming methods.
>> It's good.
It's not my favourite.
>> Asha: Can our tasters figure
out who's laid their favourites?
>> Lorraine?
>> I'm really enjoying this
Sample "F".
I think it's very good.
>> She said Sample "F" like she
knows something.
>> No, no, I don't know, and
I'm terrified.
[ Laughing ]
>> I can't wait, honestly, till
you guys find out what it
actually is because of course
I have my own speculations.
>> Asha: Time to crack open the
truth.
Are you ready?
>> Ready.
>> Asha: Show of hands, you can
only choose one.
Sample "A".
(♪♪)
Not one.
Enough said.
Whoa, that's Burnbrae's
Conventional.
You made a face there, why?
>> Because that's what I buy.
>> Asha: Did you guess that one?
>> I knew that right away.
>> Asha: Moving on.
Sample "B."
Rob?
(♪♪)
It's Gray Ridge free run, also
a bust.
Next up, Small Flock's Delight,
pricier than the first two and
also not popular.
>> Sample "C."
>> Wow.
>> You say "wow."
Why?
>> Because I was pretty sure it
was conventional, and I
actually get the Small Flock
every now and again.
>> Time of year plays a huge
difference, too.
Because summertime, the hens
are out and about enjoying
life, eating insects, eating
grasses, and that affects the
flavour and the colour.
>> Asha: The kids like Burnbrae
Organic but a majority prefer
Sample "D," Gray Ridge
conventional.
>> Sample "D."
Wow.
One, two, three, four.
You liked Sample "D," right?
>> That was my favourite.
>> That was my favourite, too.
>> Oh my.
>> Oh, my goodness, yeah.
>> Asha: It's a tie between
Gray Ridge conventional and
Organic Meadow.
>> I'm totally shocked and
humiliated and all that stuff.
>> What, why?
>> Well, because I know when I
have hens in my own backyard, I
am convinced that I can tell
the difference, like so
strongly.
I was so sure.
Like I would have put money on
it thinking, hey, this is a
happy hen, I'm eating the egg
of a happy hen and I was so
certain, and I couldn't taste
it.
>> Catherine, what do you
think?
>> My top pick was the Organic
Meadow.
I think given the ethical
issues, I would probably still
buy organic but I didn't find a
huge range of difference.
>> Morally, we all have that
choice, but some people don't
have that choice financially.
>> Absolutely, you got it.
>> The kids certainly picked
the organic as their first
choice which I found was
interesting but they're not
buying the groceries yet.
>> Better get a paper route.
Just saying.
[ Laughing ]
>> Asha: What will our taste
testers think of our
nutritional results?
Ready for the big reveal?
Sample "F."
Sample "F" is Organic Meadow.
While all the brands met their
label claims, nutritionally,
Organic Meadow eggs came out on
top.
Dietician Christy Brissette
analyzed our results.
>> So the fat profile of the
egg is healthier and vitamins
like Vitamin "D" that are fat
soluble that you find in the
yolk, they were a lot higher in
the organic sample, same thing
with Vitamin "A" and Vitamin
"E"."
>> Asha: Will these results
make a difference the next time
they shop?
Not for Hank.
He chose Gray Ridge
conventional.
>> It has all the qualities
that I need to be comfortable
in eating it.
>> Asha: So it doesn't change
your mind?
>> No, not really.
>> Asha: Catherine, what are
your thoughts?
>> I think it's really
reassuring to know that, you
know, with along with the
flavour goes better nutrition
as well.
I mean, then it sounds really
like it is worth paying that
little bit extra.
>> Very informative, a lot to
digest.
I learned a lot today about
eggs.
It will make me think twice.
>> How do you feel now that
you've finished the taste
test eggstravaganza?
Whoa, so much quieter.
I think they're ready to sleep.
>> It's a lot of rich food.
>> Everyone go home and eat a
salad.
>> Yes.
>> From the dietician's mouth.
>> Asha: Shocking cellphone
bills.
>> $1,700, I mean, that's
crazy.
>> Asha: What your kids are
allowed to get away with.
>> The data.
>> To data.
>> I'm going to accept to
continue to go with my data.
>> Is that troubling to see
that teens can do this?
>> I certainly wouldn't want my
teens doing it.
>> Asha: Just how much can they
rack up on your account?
>> You're a teenager of course
you're going to say yes.
(♪♪)